“If you have
“any word of encouragement . . . ,
tell it.”
Who said those words?
How or what did the apostle Paul
say in response?
How did his audience react?
And what can Paul’s example teach us
about encouragement?
Let’s open our Bibles to Acts chapter 13.
This is the account
of Paul’s first missionary tour.
After a dangerous journey
of about 110 miles (180 km),
Paul and his companions
find themselves seated
in a synagogue in Pisidian Antioch.
Verse 15 says:
“After the public reading
of the Law and the Prophets,
“the presiding officers of the synagogue
sent word to them, saying:
“‘Men, brothers, if you have
any word of encouragement for the people,
tell it.’”
Well, the next five paragraphs
contain Paul’s speech.
How effective was it?
Verses 42-44 show the results.
First, the people begged Paul to come back
and give another talk the next weekend.
Second, many Jews and proselytes
became believers.
Third, on the following Sabbath,
nearly all of the city turned out
to hear Paul’s next talk.
Impressive.
We have to ask ourselves,
‘What did Paul say in those five paragraphs
that was so persuasive?’
One of the first things we note
is his introduction
at Acts 13:17:
“The God of this people Israel chose
our forefathers.”
Now, note that inclusive pronoun “our”
—not your forefathers, not mine—
“our forefathers.”
Did you realize that the last time
that little word was used in the book of Acts
was all the way back in chapter 7
during Stephen’s powerful speech?
Stephen used the word “our” ten times,
usually in connection
with the word “forefathers.”
Paul heard that speech
back when he was Saul of Tarsus.
And now, more than a decade later,
he himself uses the exact same expression
for the same purpose
—to establish common ground.
‘Your ancestors are my ancestors.
I am what you are.’
And that is the starting point
of true encouragement.
The Watchtower  article
from which our text is taken
says that “the Greek word
usually translated ‘encouragement’
literally means ‘a calling to one’s side.’”
And, yes, it’s related
to the Greek word for “comfort,”
which has a similar connotation.
So Paul began from their perspective:
‘I know where you’re coming from.
I grew up
learning the same holy writings as you.’
And then in verses 17-31,
he uses Jewish history and recent events
to prove that Jesus was the Messiah.
Then in verses 32-37, he connects
current events with fulfilled prophecy
—prophecy that they knew.
We do that today, don’t we?
We go to the door; we read Matthew 24:7;
we ask: “What do you think?
“Are the wars, famines, and earthquakes
“that we’ve seen in recent years
the same as ever
or are they a distinct fulfillment
of Bible prophecy?”
And what is the message?
That Jehovah is real; that Jehovah is alive;
his Word is coming true.
And yet, Paul went further, didn’t he?
He didn’t stop there.
In verse 33, Paul said:
“God has completely fulfilled it
to us.”
Yes, this is personal.
Jehovah is at work in your life—in my life.
Then the big conclusion in verses 38-41.
In effect, Jehovah did this for you;
don’t miss out; you can succeed
with Jehovah’s help.
That was Paul’s answer to a simple request
for a “word of encouragement.”
That’s why Paul made disciples.
And isn’t that how we’re counseled to fulfill
our student assignments today?
To strengthen and encourage our audience,
we should show what Jehovah has done,
what he is doing, and what he will yet do.
But Paul’s speech was so persuasive
that it also drew persecution,
which followed him to the next two cities.
In Lystra, his persecutors thought
they had killed him.
But Acts 14:20, 21 says
that “on the next day
“he left with Barnabas for Derbe.
After declaring the good news to that city
and making quite a few disciples,”
they faced a choice.
You can see the choice on Map B13.
We’re looking at the red lines
indicating Paul’s first missionary tour.
Derbe is the last stop,
but notice the next town over to the east
—Tarsus.
Sound familiar?
Saul of Tarsus.
There was a passageway from Derbe to Tarsus.
Paul would have known the road.
He used it on his second missionary journey
and his third missionary journey,
but not this time.
Acts 14:21
—and the red arrows show that Paul returned
to all three cities
where he had been persecuted,
including Pisidian Antioch,
where he first received the request
for a “word of encouragement.”
Why? Why return?
It would have been so easy for him to think:
‘You know, we’ve had a pretty good run here.
‘I helped the ruler of Cyprus into the truth.
‘I performed my first miracle,
striking Elymas blind.
‘We started new congregations
in Pisidian Antioch, Iconium, Lystra, Derbe.
‘I endured all manner of hardships.
‘I was beaten up and stoned
and left for dead.
It was a successful missionary tour,
but I need to regroup.’
No. He didn’t think that way.
Why?
Because the needs of the congregation
outweighed his own personal feelings
or fears.
Do you suppose that the opposers
who stoned him and left him for dead
were any kinder
to the new disciples in Lystra?
Besides, who was taking the lead?
Paul needed to appoint overseers.
This was a weighty task.
So back they went.
Likewise today, our brothers
are putting the needs of the disciples
ahead of their own comforts.
Do you remember these scenes
from Jehovah’s Witnesses—Faith in Action,
Part 2: Let the Light Shine?
Now, Brother Pillars explains
that when he refused
to salute the flag in Winnsboro, Texas,
he was beaten up and hanged.
Thankfully, the rope broke,
and he survived to tell the story.
What the video doesn’t tell us
is that Oscar Pillars was a circuit overseer.
Some months later,
guess where it was time for him to return?
Winnsboro, Texas.
Now, in the months
since the hanging incident,
the brothers hadn’t been preaching downtown
—they were preaching in the rurals.
Brother Pillars reasoned
that if he didn’t preach downtown,
the brothers may never get the courage
to preach there.
So he checked out all the territories
within the city limits.
They worked there all morning and had
a beautiful time with no negative incidents,
except at the very last door.
A woman said, “Say,
you’re one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
aren’t you?”
He said, “Yes, ma’am, I am.”
She said, “You know,
we hanged one of you people here,
and we’ll do it again.”
Well, he didn’t tell her
that he was the one that they hanged.
But what a beautiful example
of standing with your brothers
and putting their needs
ahead of your own feelings!
And we have to say that this Bethel family
is not self-sparing
when encouragement is needed.
At times, though, it could be easy to think,
‘Well, I just don’t know what to say.’
But is saying something always necessary?
How do you suppose those in Lystra felt
just to see Paul again,
knowing what it must have taken
for him emotionally
simply to return?
That of itself spoke volumes.
‘OK, but I still feel
like I should say something.’
What did Paul say?
Verse 22: “We must enter
into the Kingdom of God
through many tribulations.”
The Kingdom—words of true encouragement
always center on the Kingdom.
You’re not like Job’s false comforters:
‘Clearly, you have problems here.
You must be doing something wrong.’
No, rather: ‘You’re imitating Jesus.
‘It brought the wrath of our enemy.
Well done!
‘And that you’re willing to suffer
proves that this is real.
‘You will see Jehovah back you up now.
‘You will see him reward you in the future.
Stick with it!’
Have you been called on to offer
a “word of encouragement”?
Don’t over think it, just go!
Stand beside those who need you.
And if you have
any words of encouragement for the people,
“tell it.”